fertilizer\_application
=======================

Fertilization with N, P, and N+P of 20 m x 20 m plots at 4 sites each in
upwind, core, and downwind positions will be done twice per year to test
the hypothesis that urban N deposition pushes the desert system toward P
limitation. The level of N addition (as NH4NO3) is chosen to be ~ twice
the current maximum deposition rate, i.e., 60 kg kg ha-1 y-1; P addition
level\* is 1/5 (by mass; 1/11 by atoms) that of N at 12 kg ha-1 y-1.
Fertilizer is applied to treatment plots each winter and summer to
coincide with the bimodal precipitation patterns characteristic of the
region. The prescribed weight of dry, granular fertilizer
(ammonium-nitrate for nitrogen treatments (N, N+P), triple-super
phosphate for phosphorus treatments (P, N+P)) is applied using a hand
spreader. As of August 2015, the rate of N fertilizer application was
reduced to 30 kg ha-1 y-1, with a resulting N:P ratio of 2.5:1.

plant\_root\_simulator
======================

Soil anion and cation availability are quantified twice annually using
ion-exchange membranes. Ion-exchange membranes (Plant Root Simulator
(PRS) probes) are provided and analyzed by Western Ag Innovations,
Saskatchewan, Canada. Probes for the analysis of soil anions and cations
are deployed in pairs at locations under the canopy of Larrea tridentata
(n=4) and in inter-plant spaces (n=4) within selected study plots. The
probes are inserted vertically into the top 15 cm of soil, and left
undisturbed until extraction after approximately 6 weeks in the ground.
Upon extraction, the 8 probes of each type (anion/cation) from each
habitat (plant/inter-plant) are pooled, washed with distilled water in
accordance with protocols outlined by Western Ag Innovations Inc., and
shipped overnight to Western Ag Innovations Inc. for analysis. PRS probe
analyses typically focus on nitrogen species (i.e., NO3-N and NH4-N).
However, a braoder suite of analytes is assessed approximately every 3-5
years.

stem\_growth
============

Stem length on select Larrea shrubs are measured twice per year—once in
the fall and again in the spring. Five Larrea shrubs (designated L1 thru
L5) have been selected as study plants in each plot at all CN Dep sites.
Measurements are taken at 4 points on each study plant—one on a stem
facing each of the cardinal directions. Each time the shrubs are
measured, a new piece of colored lab tape is placed around the stem,
which will be used as the point from which to measure stem elongation
during the following period. Field Protocol: Before arriving at the
study site, cut ca. 1-inch pieces of lab tape in half length-wise and
loosely stick to back of clipboard. Make enough pieces for each
direction on each plant (20 per plot). Label each piece with a plant
number (L1-L5) on the left side of the tape and a cardinal direction (N,
S, E, W) on the right side. Study plants are marked L1 thru L5 with a
silver tree tag. For each of the 5 study plants per plot: 1. Measure
stem elongation: a. Look for a piece of colored tape in each cardinal
direction of the shrub. Make sure the calipers are calibrated to zero
and you are measuring in mm. Measure the stem (in mm) from the node
directly above the piece of tape to the last node on the stem. b. If the
stem branches at any point above the tape, measure each branch
separately and record all the branch lengths separated by commas on the
datasheet. c. Do not measure the stalks of flowers or fruits. d. If the
leaves directly above or below a node have fallen off and the stem is
not measurable, make a note on the datasheet. e. If the tape cannot be
found, check on the ground around the shrub to see if the tape has
fallen off or the branch has died. Note on the datasheet if the tape is
missing or the branch is dead. Do not leave any blank spaces on the
datasheet! f. Remove the old tape from the stem. 2.Measure re-taped stem
lengths: a. Re-tape the stem with a new piece of tape. Place the tape
close to the end of the stem, but with a measurable internode between
the tape and the end of the stem. b. Measure the re-taped stem lengths
as above and record on the datasheet.

leaf\_tissue\_icpms
===================

Field collection: (1) Randomly choose 5 creosote plants in each of the 5
study plots for every site (15 sites total). Do not choose shrubs chosen
for stem-elongation (growth) measurements. (2) From each plant, randomly
select one stem in each of 4 cardinal directions. (3) From each stem,
pick 4, fully developed leaf pairs from the green section of the primary
stem. We are defining fully developed leaves as those that are just
behind the newest leaves (the newest leaves are the 2 undeveloped green
ones plus the ones just attached to them). Do not choose leaves that are
farther back down the stem or leaves that are brown and/or damaged. (4)
Place all leaves from each plot in a coin envelope. (5) Place coin
envelopes into a dryer (60°C) upon returning to the laboratory or within
48 h. Lab processing: (1) Rinse all picked leaves with DI water in a
clean fine meshed sieve and place in a coin envelope with the site name,
plot name, and date processed. (2) Dry all leaves in coin envelopes at
70°C for at least 48 h before grinding. (3) Fill polycarb vial
approximately 1/2 full with leaf litter, add one of the polycarb balls
and cap vial, place vials in ball mill chamber and mill for 10 minutes.
ICPMS: Dried and milled Larrea leaf tissue is microwave digested using a
CEM MARSXpress. Approximately 0.2500g of sample was allowed to react
with 10mL of Trace Metal Grade nitric acid (Fisher \#A509-P212) for 15
minutes, uncapped, then ran on the CEM using the following method: 1600W
at 100% power, ramped up to 180°C over the course of 15 minutes, and
held at 180°C for 15 minutes. Samples were diluted at 100X prior to
being run by ICP-MS. Samples were analyzed using a Thermo Fisher
Scientific X Series 2 quadrapole ICP-MS and Cetac ASX- 520 autosampler.
Sample introduction consisted of a conical spray chamber with impact
bead and concentric nebulizer with a flow of ~1ml/min. The spray chamber
was cooled to 3°C by a Peltier cooling system. Collision Cell Technology
(CCT) mode was utilized to reduce interferences by the argon gas used to
generate the plasma by using a mixture of 7% hydrogen and 93% helium for
the following elements: Fe, Se, As, and Ca. All other elements were run
in normal mode. Internal standards (Sc, Ge, Y, In, and Bi) were used to
compensate for sample matrix effects and instrument variability.

annuals\_biomass
================

Each spring when there is sufficient rainfall, we estimate aboveground
net primary productivity (ANPP) of herbaceous annual plants in each of
the Desert Fertilization Experiment study plots by harvesting the
aboveground portion of annual herbs from a 1/2 m x 1/2 m section of
established 1 m x 1 m sub-plots. These plots are distinguished from
similar 1 m x 1 m sub-plots that are used for community composition.
Take care to avoid the community composition sub-plots! Only harvest the
sub-plots that are designated for biomass. Protocol overview: In each
Desert Fertilization experiment plot, we established 4 biomass sub-plots
per plot, two in each of two patch types, between shrubs (IP for
inter-plant space) and under the canopies of Larrea tridentata (P for
under plant). Each sub-plot is coded with the patch type (IP or P); the
letter B for biomass (to distinguish it from the community composition
sub-plots, which are not harvested and do not have a letter B after the
patch type code); and the sub-plot number (1 or 2). For example, IPB1 &
IPB2 are interplant space sub=plots one and two, and PB1 & PB2 are
sub-plots 1 and 2 under Larrea tridentata shrubs. Remember that the
biomass sub-plots are distinguished from the community composition
sub-plots with the letter B after the patch type code (example, IPB1 =
Biomass sub-plot 1, inter-plant space). Within each 1 m x 1 m biomass
sub-plot, teams will clip aboveground annual biomass from one 1/2 m x
1/2 m quadrat in each 1-meter biomass sub-plot. This sub-section is
rotated each year so that any given patch of ground is harvested at the
most once every four years. Teams will carefully write the plot
identifier on paper bags. (Double-check the labels! Labeling mistakes
are the most common error in this procedure). Then teams will cut all
green and brown herbaceous plant biomass that occurs within the
boundaries of the 1/2 m x 1/2 m sub section and place it in the
pre-labeled bag. After the harvest is complete, teams will dry the bags
and biomass at 60°C for 48 hr then weigh the biomass (subtracting the
weight of the bag) on a scale and record.

annuals\_composition
====================

Overview: In Spring 2008 within each site, the CAP LTER randomly chose
and permanently marked four 1 m x 1 m sub-plots within each 20 m x 20 m
main plot, split between two patch types, under L. tridentata shrubs and
inter-plant spaces (hereafter, under L. tridentata, P and Inter-plant
space; IP). At peak herbaceous biomass (in approximately March of each
year), percent cover of all annual herbaceous species rooted within
these four plots (two each under L. tridentata and in interplant spaces
i.e. between shrubs) will be estimated. Note that there are also four 1
m x 1 m Biomass sub-plots in each 20 m x 20 m plot – these are different
than the community composition plots described here because they are
clipped each year while the community composition plots are not. Care
should be taken in the field to identify the correct four plots for
community composition and avoid the four plots to be harvested for
biomass. Steps: 1. On the top of the data sheet (See Table 3 for
sample), record the date; names of the sampling crew (i.e. plant
identifier, recorder); site (three letter code); plot number (1 to 75);
treatment (C1 – no sampling from C2 plots, Nitrogen \[N\], Phosphorus
\[P\], and Nitrogen+Phosphorus \[NP\]). Double check the plot numbers
and sub-plot numbers! 2. All observers should first calibrate their
percent cover estimates on several test plots in the field prior to
percent cover measurements. You want to make sure all botanists are
seeing the plots similarly. 3. Place the 1 m x 1 m quadrat over the
corner rebar at each 1-m2 plot. Working in teams of two (one recorder,
one plant identifier), proceed through the steps below. 4. Estimate and
record (at the bottom of the data sheet) the relative areal cover of
plant matter (e.g. green material) versus bare ground (e.g. brown
material) at the soil surface in the plot (e.g. 70% green, 30% brown).
If there are soil crusts, measure those as well in a separate category.
5. Identify which annual species are present in the plot and mark a
small dot in the corner of the datasheet to easily find later. Use
roughly the same amount of effort in each plot to find plant species. As
you get better, it will take less time because you are getting more
skilled; as you get tired, it will take more time; in simpler systems,
it will take less time. There is no a priori way to know when you are
using the same amount of effort, but this is usually approximated by
time (in minutes: typically 1-3 minutes per species). Each botanist
should do some test plots to see how long it takes him/her to find all
the species in the plot. Different botanists will take different amounts
of time to apply the same effort– this is ok – but the same botanist
should use approximately the same amount of time per plot. 6. Next,
estimate and record the cover of each species individually to the
nearest whole number (e.g., 1%, 2%, 3%...97%, 98%, 99%, 100%). If a
species is present in a plot, but does not cover a full 1%, record it as
&lt;1%. The sum of all individual species cover can be greater than 100%
since some species overlap. 7. Finally, estimate and record the cover of
the overstory shrubs within the plot or overhanging the plot. We
estimate cover for all annuals rooted in the quadrat, but areal cover of
any shrubs rooted in or hanging over the plot. For IP plots, this will
be zero most of the time (i.e. unless there is a large shrub nearby that
has grown over the plot). For P plots, this will be have two components:
(1) the areal projection of the shrub onto the 2-D grid, and (2) the
area of the stem base or any other shrub stems. It is expected that the
cover of the shrubs overlap the herbaceous species. However if two shrub
species overlap in their cover aggregate these into a single larger
individual (rare case). 8. Unknown species are recorded with unique
identifiers (e.g., Unknown 1, Unknown 2, etc) along with a visual
description of the plant and a picture to be used to help identify the
unknown in the lab. When possible, a sample of the unknown species
should be collected from outside of the plot in a labeled coin envelope
and brought to the herbarium to be identified. Unknown species are
usually very small and\_or undeveloped, and may not be able to be
identified to species – this is ok. Err on the side of lumping unknown
species into other known species in the same plot. 9. Use caution not to
include the percent cover of desiccated/dead plants within the plots
from the previous season (these can usually be identified easily as
white, old plant material). However, depending on the timing of data
collection, some herbaceous plants from the current growing season may
have passed peak biomass and already begun to desiccate (dry out or
senesce). In this case, estimate the percent cover of these plants as if
they were at peak biomass. 10. Before you leave a site, confirm that you
have datasheets for all plots and sub-plots, and that there are no
duplicates or ambiguous plot labels on your sheet.
